---
title: Quebec's War on English - Bad Journalism intensifies in Canadian Province
layout: default
category: personal
---

WARNING
=======

*This is a personal rant on an article that first appeard in The Times. The original
can be found [here](http://world.time.com/2013/04/08/quebecs-war-on-english-language-politics-intensify-in-canadian-province/).
As with any other rant on the internet, keep in mind this is extremly
opinionated, hasn't been proofread and isn't very serious. None of this should be taken at face-value*

*I would also like to say that I'd be more than happy to talk about "the language barrier", in a more
civilised manner, with other english speakers living in Québec City around a nice cup of Coffee or some Tea. (That is,
if you still think i'm a respectable person after reading my rant ;)*

Quebec's War on English: Bad Journalism intensifies in Canadian Province
========================================================================

> To live in Quebec is to become accustomed to daily reminders that French in the
> Canadian province is the most regulated language in the world.

"Most regulated language in the world" ? According to who ? Where's your source
? Any facts ? This sounds more like a sensational headline than an actual fact.

> Try, as I did recently, to shop at Anthropologie online and you’ll come up
> empty-handed. The retail chain (which bears a French name) opened its first
> Montreal boutique in October, but “due to the Charter of the French Language”
> has had its site shut down: “We hope you’ll visit us in store!”

Let me get this straight. You open a new shop... but you don't put any effort in
translating your web site for your new clients ?! Why ? Where's the business
sense in that ? Do you actually even care about your clients in the first place ?
IMO the blame goes to Anthropologie.

> Montreal’s transit authority maintains that under the present language law, its
> ticket takers must operate in French, which lately has spurred complaints from
> passengers.

Last time I checked Montreal is still a part of Québec, a province where the official
language is French. Asking your employees to operate in the official language is
what we call common sense. The *opposite* would be controversial.

> Last year, the city of Montreal erected 60 English safety signs nearby
> Anglophone schools in an effort to slow passing vehicles. The Quebec Board of
> the French Language and its squad of inspectors ordered that they be taken
> down; a snowy drive through town revealed that all had been replaced by French
> notices.

Again, we're talking about a city in a french province. However, I will concede
that a better compromise would have been to replace the signs with bilingual ones.
It doesn't take much effort to put 2 words on a sign (Stop / Arrêt) instead of just 1.

> Since the Parti Québécois (PQ), which calls for national sovereignty for
> Quebec, won a minority government in September, the reminders have become
> increasingly less subtle.

This shouldn't come as a surprise to no one. If it does, then maybe you should
pay a bit more attention to politics, or go back to school and redo your course
on Canadian History. The author even hints as to why this shouldn't surprise
anyone (as if it wasn't obvious enough): "the Parti Québécois (PQ), which calls
for **national sovereignty for Quebec**".  *Learn to take a hint*.

> In February, a language inspector cited the swank supper club Buonanotte, which
> occupies a stretch of St. Laurent Boulevard, Montreal’s cultural and commercial
> artery, for using Italian words like pasta on its otherwise French menu. The
> ensuing scandal, which has come to be known as “pastagate,” took social media
> by storm. “These are problems we had in the 1980s,” says restaurant owner
> Massimo Lecas. “They were over and done with; we could finally concentrate on
> the economy and fixing potholes. And then this new government brought them all
> back. These issues might never go away now, and that is a scary sort of
> future.”

Now here I agree that the OQLF went too far with all this "pasta" business,
 but this is just a personal feeling. I wouldn't really be able to tell you
any good reason as to why I feel this way.

> It’s true: despite the nuisances and controversies generated by Bill 101,
> Quebec’s 1977 Charter of the French Language, the province had settled in the
> past years into a kind of linguistic peace.

What ? "Lingustic peace" ? What kind of bullshit is this ?! There hasn't been a
year where we haven't heard of **at least** one controversy around the
infamous battle of french VS english.

> But tensions have mounted considerably since the separatist PQ returned to the
> fore.

Once again, **Obvious observation about the PQ is obvious** (see 3 paragraphs earlier)

> In the wake of pastagate, the language board allowed that its requests were
> maybe overzealous; the head of the organization resigned.

I wasn't even aware that someone resigned, so I can't really comment on this.

> And yet the PQ has prepared for the passage of Bill 14, a massive and massively
> controversial revision to Bill 101.  The bill’s 155 proposed amendments go
> further than any previous measures have to legislate the use of French in
> Quebec.

Frankly I have no clue what Bill 14 is about, but I agree that if it's as
controversial as the author wants us to believe, then it deserves to be debated
and should be *objectively* criticized (with emphasis on the word
"objectively". People in Québec are too emotional when they start arguing
about language laws. This is true for **both** english speakers and french
speakers)

> Most English speakers see the changes as having been designed to run them right
> out of the province.“Definitely non-Francophone kids who are graduating are
> leaving,” says restaurateur Lecas. “If you don’t have a mortgage yet, if you’re
> not married yet, if you don’t own a business yet, it’s like, ‘I’m so outta
> here.’ But leaving is not the solution because when you leave, they win.”

THIS SORT OF ATTITUDE ENFURIATES ME TO NO END.

## GO !$&(?/)&(insert profanity here)$&#%? YOURSELF. ##



*\*insert witty remark here while I go take 10 minutes to blow off some steam\**



Why the hell is it always **US** vs **THEM** ?!?! "when you leave, they win".
WIN WHAT ?  SINCE WHEN HAS THIS BEEN A CONTEST ?


*\*insert second witty remark here while I regain my composure over the
dumbfoundedness of the last statement\**


It saddens me to see english speakers AND french speakers who still think about
the language barrier as some sort of war that must be won at all costs.  It's
so depressing that........you know what ? going on about this is pointless. I
could go on bragging for the rest of the week. On to the next paragraph

> In a poll conducted by the research company EKOS in January, 42% of the
> Anglophones surveyed said they’ve considered quitting Quebec since the PQ was
> elected.

A pity. I live in Québec City and I don't meet many english speakers
(besides my family). It would a shame to meet even less.

> If Bill 14 passes, military families living in Quebec but liable to be
> relocated at any time will no longer be permitted to send their children to
> English-language schools. Municipalities whose Anglophone inhabitants make up
> less than 50% of their populations will lose their bilingual status, meaning,
> among other things, that residents won’t be able to access government documents
> in English.

For once, I agree with the author that this might be going too far.

> For the first time, companies with 25 to 49 workers will be
> required to conduct all business in French, a process set to cost medium-size
> businesses $23 million.

Why wern't they conducting business in french in the first place ?

> French speakers interested in attending English-language colleges will take a
> backseat to Anglophone applicants.

I find it a little odd that the author is suddenly worried about schooling for
french speakers.  Hey, maybe she isn't such a bad person after all ! (I guess)

> The language inspectors will be able to instantly search and seize potentially
> transgressive records, files, books and accounts, where currently they can only
> “request” documents that they believe aren’t in accordance with the law. And no
> longer will they grant a compliance period. As soon as a person or business is
> suspected of an offense, “appropriate penal proceedings may be instituted.”

This also sounds a bit too extreme. However, it only sounds extreme because
we're only seeing one side of the picture. What does the other side say ?

> Jamie Rosenbluth of JR Bike Rental is among the business owners who’ve had
> run-ins with the ever more bold language board, which already has the authority
> to impose fines and, in extreme cases, shut enterprises down. A month ago, an
> inspector asked him to translate the Spanish novelty posters that paper his
> shop and increase the size of the French writing on his bilingual pricing list
> by 30%. Says Rosenbluth: “I told her, ‘You want me to make the French words 30%
> bigger? O.K., how about I charge French-speaking people 30% more?’ It is so
> silly. Are they 30% better than me? Are they 30% smarter than me?” Since the
> encounter, he has covered the offending posters with placards of his own that
> say, in French, “Warning: Non-French sign below. Read at your own discretion.”

Dude, you're not in spain. NEWS FLASH: We speak french here. The least you can
do is make sure that we understand what's on your promotional posters.

> The PQ is trying to reassure its separatist base of its seriousness as a
> defender of Quebecois identity. To pass Bill 14, it will need the support of at
> least one of the province’s two primary opposition parties. In other words, if
> the bill doesn’t succeed, Premier Pauline Marois of the PQ will be able to hold
> the opposition accountable and remain a hero to the hard-liners. The PQ knows
> that, in its present incarnation, it will never drastically expand its core of
> support, but it can galvanize its troops. Some of those supporters rallied
> together in Montreal last month to protest “institutional bilingualism” and
> champion the bill. Cheers and applause resounded when journalist Pierre Dubuc
> called out: “If someone can’t ask for a metro ticket in French, let them walk.”

I'm no fan of these of these kinds political games either, but I would also be
a fool if I thought that the PQ was the only party to use these kinds of
tactics. Instead, we should be asking ourselves why our modern political
parties can still get away with this kind of tomfoolery.

> Public hearings on Bill 14 began in early March at the National Assembly in
> Quebec City and are ongoing. “I can tell you that if someone came to
> Côte-St.-Luc to tell us we would lose our bilingual status, you will have
> chaos, you will have opposition of people you wouldn’t think of who will take
> to the streets,” testified Anthony Housefather, mayor of the municipality of
> Côte-St.-Luc, on the first day. “People are scared, people are very scared.” By
> the time Quebec’s largest Anglophone school board, Lester B. Pearson, came
> forward on March 19, it had already collected 32,000 signatures on a petition
> against the bill. “There are many ways of protecting French, and coercion isn’t
> one of them,” says Simo Kruyt, a member of the board’s central parent
> committee. “Fourteen of our schools have closed over the past seven years. We
> are getting fed up. We are getting tired of having to fight to be who we are.
> English is the language of commerce and we parents believe we are part of a
> world that’s larger than Quebec.”

Here's an example of what I was talking about earlier: people get
emotional when they start arguing about the language barrier. Nevertheless, Mr.
Housefather's and Mr. Kruyt's feelings hold some truth:

> “People are scared, people are very scared.”

They have a right to be scared. Who wouldn't ? We should acknowledge their fears more openly.

> “There are many ways of protecting French, and coercion isn’t one of them,”

Coercion is never the answer to a problem. Tunnel vision doesn't help either.
What does the other side say ?

> “Fourteen of our schools have closed over the past seven years. We are getting
> fed up. We are getting tired of having to fight to be who we are. English is
> the language of commerce and we parents believe we are part of a world that’s
> larger than Quebec.”

Frankly I don't think i'm in a position to contemplate this kind of situation.
I have always spoken in both languages with my family and I've switched schools
a few times (both english and french). However, I can imagine that it can
be quite depressing to have to "defend" your cultural identity. Nonetheless, I
'd like to emphasise his last sentence:

> "English is the language of commerce and we parents believe we are part of a
> world that’s larger than Quebec."

The citation says it all.

> It’s hard yet to say if the bill will make it through. The opposition Liberals
> have flat-out refused to support the legislation. The Coalition Avenir Québec,
> which holds the balance, has said that it might — if certain of the more
> controversial measures are “improved.” In fact, the Coalition has only come out
> against four sections of Bill 14, and these don’t include the provisions that
> would give the dreaded language inspectors new and extraordinary powers. In the
> face of such antagonism, it’s no wonder some are leaving. Kruyt’s eldest son, a
> bilingual 27-year-old engineer, is preparing to relocate to Ottawa, the
> Canadian capital that sits near Quebec’s western border. Says Kruyt: “There,
> they’ll appreciate his French and won’t hammer him because of his English.”

Did you really need to say that Ottawa is "the Canadian capital that sits near
Quebec’s western border" ?  Isn't that, like, general knowledge ? Last time I
checked canadian geography was still a mandatory subject in high school.  The
world is bigger than the city of Montreal (O RLY ?!?! SURPRISE !)

Otherwise, the whole paragraph is just overly dramatic and will only serve to fuel
sensationalist propaganda.

Conclusion (not really)
-----------------------

This will probably be my only rant on the language controversy in Canada.
Whenever it comes to the language barrier, it's always hard.

# ALWAYS. #


Let me repeat that again...


# LANGUAGES IN CANADA ARE F\*\*\*ING COMPLICATED  #


I'll say it in french aswell (just to be sure...)


# LES LANGUES AU CANADA, C'EST CR\*SSEMENT COMPLIQUÉ #


People who start arguing about the subject should put themselves in the shoes of the opposite language more often. There are no simple answers and I don't think there ever will be.
However, stupid journalism will certainly not make the situation any better and should be vigourously discouraged, less we start fighting each other for the wrong reasons.
